---
title: discussion-vs-rhetoric
date: '2021-12-16'
tags: ['markdown', 'philosophy']
draft: false
summary: Just a sample blog post of something I wrote a long time ago
---

# Discussion vs Rhetoric

​​&emsp;What I have noticed while talking to people on social media is a lot of rhetoric and signaling. It is a flag-waving exercise that is meant to rally our side’s troops, mock our opposition, and impress our audience with our witty comments. I don’t think there is anything wrong with that since rhetoric is a useful and important tool for shaping public opinion and it can be a lot of fun to spar with a clever opponent. However, when it comes to social media, rhetoric doesn’t build bridges or cultivate understanding. That is not what it is for.

​​&emsp;If you get into an adversarial Facebook (or any social media) argument with someone and want to convince them that their position is wrong or misguided, you are almost certainly going to be unhappy with the result. Yet, sometimes, people do end up changing their minds after discussing the topic with someone who holds a different opinion. Note that I say DISCUSSING. A term which bears little resemblance to the one-liners and memes that are clogging your Facebook feed right now. In rare circumstances, two people with different opinions about issues can update their position on the subject after talking it out and build on the substrate of good faith argumentation. We all have some idea of what an argument lacking good faith looks like. Trolling, snide comments, and snarky memes are clearly not meant to encourage serious dialogue. When someone enters a dispute without good faith, he or she lacks sincere interest with other points of view or opinion. They simply want to WIN the argument (whatever that means). Basically asserting intellectual dominance by any means possible. Needless to say, few people find themselves thoughtfully evaluating new ideas when confronted with tactics like these, but they’re not supposed to.

​​&emsp;Arguments in good faith, on the other hand, have several note-worthy characteristics that don’t seem to show up on Facebook very often. The first and most important that I can think of is the sort of pervasive epistemic humility. A clear willingness to entertain the possibility that one’s own opinions might be biased or incomplete. This central principle is linked with several important elements of good faith arguments. I think we all (including myself) need a higher awareness of conjecture and confirmation bias. Also, someone arguing in good faith should have respect for and curiosity about different opinions. There should be a willingness to point out a weakness in one’s own position and they should accommodate leniency for poorly argued points that might have merit. Also, a cautious temperance to universal or absolute claims. The good faith arguer spends nearly the same amount of time absorbing and clarifying their opponent’s ideas as they do explaining their own. Questions are used as tools of understanding. They are sincere and inviting for further dialogue rather than forcing their opponents into a corner or setting them up for a crushing counter-argument. This is especially important in an atmosphere of ideological mudslinging. A good faith arguer maintains a legitimate attitude of open-minded consideration.

​​&emsp;A widespread method for “trolling” the opposition is faking good faith arguments. I know it is exhausting to fight through the urge to just rant at the people you disagree with, but having a true good faith effort rewarded with harassment disguised as miscomprehension is enough to ruin anyone’s day. It takes a lot of emotional resilience to make yourself vulnerable like that. It is much easier to relax comfortably in blissful self-assurance and be soothed by the illusion that anyone that has a different opinion is either stupid or dishonest.

​​&emsp;Without good faith defenses of other points of view, our only exposure to them is one-sided and biased. Driving us to a certainty that our ideas are the only sensible ones and it prevents us from improving our accuracy. I think one of our core principles should be to assume good faith wherever possible. This is based on the idea that most people are trying to help improve the community even if what they say kind of sucks. Good faith discussion is necessary to build the most objective and factual reference possible.

​​&emsp;I think rhetoric is fine. I consider it a kind of performance art and it can be very effective. However, if you decide to make a punching bag out of someone’s seemingly ludicrous point of view, it is foolish to believe the one holding that view will suddenly want to be on your team. For that, we will need a healthy dose of good faith.
